[Amit Varma]: What makes a city? On one hand, it is clear that people make a city. The way we live,
[Amit Varma]: the things we do, the languages we speak, the food we eat, all the things we call culture.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, our streets and buildings aren't just functional constructions without
[Amit Varma]: meaning or impact. Embedded within the walls of our cities, travelling through the bylanes,
[Amit Varma]: in the very air we breathe, is a deep history that shapes our culture and our cities. We
[Amit Varma]: may be unaware of this history and yet it shapes us in so many unseen ways. Delhi is
[Amit Varma]: a particularly fascinating city in this regard because it is not just one city but many.
[Amit Varma]: There have been 7 cities of Delhi, perhaps even 14 depending on which source you believe.
[Amit Varma]: These separate cities of Delhi are cities that have stood apart but that have also been
[Amit Varma]: superimposed like layers forming a three-dimensional tapestry, one on top of the other. These different
[Amit Varma]: cities have carried with them the DNA of various civilizations. Delhi is not just an Indian
[Amit Varma]: city but also a Turkish city, also a Persian city, also a British city. And this blend
[Amit Varma]: of influences from across the world into one organic complex beast makes Delhi also a quintessentially
[Amit Varma]: Indian city because what is India if not a delightful khichdi that contains all of the
[Amit Varma]: world. I am an occasional visitor to Delhi and driving through these streets of relatively
[Amit Varma]: recent vintage, I often see these old monuments all around me, these repositories of our past
[Amit Varma]: and I wonder, if these walls could speak, what stories would they tell?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is Rana Safwi, author of a trilogy titled
[Amit Varma]: Where Stones Speak. In her books, Rana takes an affectionate look at our architecture and
[Amit Varma]: places it in the context of the history of the many Delhi's. And indeed, it is these
[Amit Varma]: many Delhi's as opposed to the one or two most of us know of which we call Old Delhi
[Amit Varma]: and New Delhi that makes this place so fascinating. Before we begin our conversation though, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Seen and the Unseen has been a labor of love. I've enjoyed putting together
[Amit Varma]: many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money
[Amit Varma]: off the show. Although The Seen and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of
[Amit Varma]: keeping this thing going, and that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of The Seen and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to seenunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription. The Seen
[Amit Varma]: and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seenunseen.in. This
[Amit Varma]: is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep this thing going. seenunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Rana, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. Thank you so much for inviting me.
[Amit Varma]: Rana, before we begin talking about your fascinating books and the work that you've done, tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about yourself. Are you a Delhi person to begin with?
[Guest]: I'm Delhi's adopted daughter. I never lived in Delhi. I was brought up in Lucknow. I belong
[Guest]: to Aligarh. I did my schooling in Lucknow and then college in Aligarh. And after that,
[Guest]: after I got married, we lived in various cities all over the country, as far as Cochin and
[Guest]: Pune. And then we went to the Middle East. And it was really one of my trips from the
[Guest]: Middle East to Delhi that something pulled me to it. And my daughter was living here,
[Guest]: working here. And that's the first time I really came to Delhi, not as a point of transit,
[Guest]: but as a visitor to Delhi. And I went to Mehroli on a heritage walk. And that's when something
[Guest]: inside me urged me to write about it, to document the history of Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: And were you someone who is generally otherwise into the history of cities, like when you
[Amit Varma]: lived in all these different cities? You know, did architecture draw you in? Did you notice
[Amit Varma]: these things? I mean, the reason I ask is this almost naive question is because when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to myself, a lot of the city around me, wherever I am, almost becomes invisible.
[Amit Varma]: It's it's normalized. So I'm in my own cocoon. I could be, you know, at a cafe or at home
[Amit Varma]: or in my car, and I don't notice stuff around me. So have you always been a noticer or did
[Amit Varma]: that start happening after you got interested in architecture has always fascinated me.
[Guest]: I did my master's in history. And though I specialized in economic history, because I
[Guest]: was studying in Aligarh Muslim University. But after I finished my master's, and even
[Guest]: before it was always monuments, which fascinated me, though I never at that point of time ever
[Guest]: thought I would be working on it so seriously. And I still remember, I think I was about
[Guest]: 14 or 15 years old when I went to Fatehpur Sikri. And the mystique of that city, a city
[Guest]: which was so alive yet so dead with nobody living there, you know, that city pulled me
[Guest]: to it. And at that time, I didn't know what it was, but I could feel something that there
[Guest]: are some, you know, the there is a saying in Urdu, khe khandar bata rahe hain, khe maara
[Guest]: shandaar thi. So that is what has always spoken to me whenever I've been to these monuments.
[Guest]: People see them as ruins. I see them as places where people lived and laughed and lived and
[Guest]: loved and that each of them has a story. Today, of course, there's nobody to tell the story.
[Guest]: So I just took it upon myself. Maybe it was a bit ambitious or whatever you can call it.
[Guest]: But I just thought that these stories through the books that have been written on them,
[Guest]: especially Delhi is very well documented. So I went to the 18th, 19th century Urdu books
[Guest]: and chronicles and I started documenting from there. Then all the gazettes and all the books
[Guest]: that have been written under the SI, the archaeological reports, all of them document Delhi's monuments
[Guest]: during the 19th and the 20th century. So I used all of them. And from there, I unraveled
[Guest]: the history of most of Delhi's monuments, I think. In my trilogy by now, I must have
[Guest]: covered at least three to four hundred monuments.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And monuments not just in the terms of covering the monuments, but placing them in
[Amit Varma]: the context of history and all of that, which also really fascinated. Are you someone who's
[Amit Varma]: always been into history in that sense?
[Guest]: Yes. History has always been my subject. And I was not after my master's. I've been teaching
[Guest]: history also. I taught it at a school level in the senior school, 8th, 9th and 10th. I
[Guest]: taught it in Jamshedpur. Then I taught it when I was in the Middle East. So I've been
[Amit Varma]: in touch with history and teaching history.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this old cliche that goes like, for example, when people listen to some of
[Amit Varma]: the episodes I've done with historians like, you know, our mutual friend Manu and Ira and
[Amit Varma]: Parvati and so on. And people often say that they make history so interesting. And in school,
[Amit Varma]: it was so boring. Our teachers taught it so badly. And now I'm sitting with someone who
[Amit Varma]: actually taught history in school. So what was your approach towards sort of then teaching
[Guest]: history like?
[Guest]: I had wonderful teachers of history. So when I taught history, I tried to take it away
[Guest]: from just the, you know, the dates. Most students are just told, you know, learn this date.
[Guest]: I tried to analyze it, which is what the way I was taught. That history is all about analyzing
[Guest]: the events that happen and why they happen, not just mugging up the dates. So I would,
[Guest]: of course, in school, I would give them the dates and I would give them the charts and
[Guest]: I would give them these, you know, how to learn them. But I would also explain that
[Guest]: what is so fascinating and interesting about the dates. And then that makes it come life
[Guest]: for the student and then they remember it. So I remember a student telling me that history
[Guest]: was never my subject. I taught him in class eight and sixth and seventh. He had already
[Guest]: been doing it. And he said that history was never my subject. But now I think I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to take it up further.
[Amit Varma]: And you're possibly, you know, doing the same service to your writings today. Did it help
[Amit Varma]: while you were doing historical research? Did it sort of help that you could read multiple
[Amit Varma]: languages very well? Like, you know, you even got a book of translated works from Urdu to
[Amit Varma]: English and did more sources, therefore, come alive for you because you could read Urdu.
[Guest]: Urdu is the language that I read. And that also is an interesting journey because Urdu
[Guest]: also I had learned as a child and then, you know, my knowledge was very rusty. I relearned
[Guest]: it because when I decided to start writing and I start, I have this forum called Shire
[Guest]: running on Twitter. It's still running after 10 years almost. And in that, once I started
[Guest]: that, I started learning Urdu to understand what Urdu poetry is all about, not just, you
[Guest]: know, writing it in Roman, but what are the symbols, what is the thought behind the poet's
[Guest]: mind. And as I went deeper and deeper into it, then obviously you need to know Urdu.
[Guest]: So I learned Urdu and relearned, I should say, a language which I had forgotten. And
[Guest]: that then helped me when I shifted to history. And that has been a big asset to me because,
[Guest]: as I said, one of the two very definitive books which have been written on Delhi, one
[Guest]: was in Urdu called Asaru Sanadev, which I translated. Another is a three volume book
[Guest]: by Bashiruddin Ahmed written in 1917 or so called Delhi Darul Hukumat. So that is the
[Guest]: book which I have used as a base because they describe a Delhi which is no longer there.
[Guest]: A lot of, most of the monuments have been destroyed or are in ruins or whatever it is.
[Guest]: So I use that as a base to take the stories, some anecdotes from there, then do my own
[Guest]: research and then place it that, okay, something was here at that time, where has it gone?
[Guest]: And why has it disappeared? Or what was the way that people saw it in, say, in the event
[Guest]: Sir Syed writes, he's writing it at the time of the Mughal Empire. So when he saw the Red
[Guest]: Fort, he saw it as a working, living palace. We see it today just as a tourist place. So
[Guest]: then Bashiruddin Ahmed described it under the British. And he says that, you know, the
[Guest]: room, there's one room, the Khwabga, and he says the British have made this into a Mughal
[Guest]: room where you can come and savour the same delights of being a Mughal. So you have the
[Guest]: same sitting arrangement and Shah Jahan's sabre kept there and, you know, the Bahadur
[Guest]: Shah's hookah kept there, so you come and feel like a king. So these things made it
[Guest]: very fascinating for me. And that is why in my book, the last book that's come out, Shah
[Guest]: Jahanabad, The Living City, I have not only described the ruins, I have also described
[Guest]: as what it would have been like, taking material from these books, which are trying to show
[Guest]: that. And also, I translated another couple of books which talk about the culture and
[Guest]: the people of those days. So I took from all these books to try and recreate a Delhi which
[Guest]: existed in those days.
[Amit Varma]: And how was the experience that, okay, you go to this monument, and it's just an empty
[Amit Varma]: tourist place and you look around and the first time you're seeing it as an outsider,
[Amit Varma]: you're a tourist. And then you read a book like this, which, you know, makes it much
[Amit Varma]: richer and, you know, brings that era alive. And then you go back to that place. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, does the whole city start meaning different things to you?
[Guest]: So normally, when I go to my first visit, I don't read much about it, except whatever
[Guest]: I know, because I want that first impression to be my impression. And I photograph everything,
[Guest]: I videograph it, so that, you know, I have everything there that, then I come back and
[Guest]: then I read about it. And then when I read, I look at my photographs and see, okay, this
[Guest]: is what, you know, sometimes I've taken a photograph, which may not have meant anything
[Guest]: at that time. But when I come back and read about it, then I realize, okay, this is what
[Guest]: they're talking about. Then I go back. And then that is my final research of placing
[Guest]: it. And like in the case of Shahjahanabad, because that, and Mehroli also before that.
[Guest]: Shahjahanabad is where people are staying. Then I go and talk to the local people. And
[Guest]: in Shahjahanabad, I've done a lot of interviews, which I have included where, what do the people
[Guest]: who are living there think about it? So in so many cases, they said that, you know, old
[Guest]: people think of old Delhi only as a food capital, or they think of it as a place where, you
[Guest]: know, it is unsafe. So how do the residents who are living there for say 200, 300 years,
[Guest]: some of them who came with Shahjahanabad, some who came shortly after that, how do they
[Guest]: see their heritage? And how are they trying to preserve it? So I've tried to collect that
[Guest]: also, because I wanted to put all that in one place as a record, document that.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess in doing all this, one trap you've tried to avoid is a trap that writers may
[Amit Varma]: have of exoticizing the everyday. So you're writing about a place that is very old and
[Amit Varma]: has this rich history. And you know, there is a trap of reading too much into it and
[Amit Varma]: how you avoided sidestep that, of course, is by taking all these interviews and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, speaking to kind of local people there, you know, do you often find that people who
[Amit Varma]: are actually living in the midst of history, as it were, that they are kind of unaware
[Amit Varma]: of all that has happened around them? And is that a good thing or a bad thing?
[Guest]: See, in Delhi, the problem is that we saw two exodus, especially in Shahjahanabad, we
[Guest]: saw an exodus in 1857, there was displacement. And then again, when they did come back, these
[Guest]: people had lost their inheritance and lived a different life from what they had lived
[Guest]: under the Mughals. But the whole of Delhi saw displacement and a transfer of population
[Guest]: in 1947. So when you go to many places in Delhi, there used to be, say about 20-30 years
[Guest]: ago, there was no sense of association of people who had migrated from Pakistan. For
[Guest]: them, this was just a place where they had come and they were trying to make a living.
[Guest]: But today's generation has grown up with these monuments. So the schoolchildren, for them,
[Guest]: it is something that is a part of their heritage. And they are no longer longing for what they've
[Guest]: left behind, because they've seen only this, that's what they've grown up in. So for them,
[Guest]: that association is also a very important thing. So when I talk to them, in Shahjahanabad,
[Guest]: the families that I talk to have been living there forever. So since Shahjahanabad was
[Guest]: made, or maybe, you know, they are the sixth generation or seventh generation, fourth generation,
[Guest]: fifth generation. So for them, of course, it is something that is theirs. But say, when
[Guest]: I did a book called The Forgotten Cities of Delhi, now where we are sitting in Hauz Khas,
[Guest]: this was the second city of Delhi city made by Alauddin Khilji. Nothing of the original
[Guest]: city remains except one or two monuments like the Chor Minar and the Idgaah that is here.
[Guest]: The people who are living here have no memory of the past. So for them, everything, they
[Guest]: are probably just, you know, going past and wondering what is the strange looking monument.
[Guest]: They don't know it. But if you go to a place where people have always lived and lived with
[Guest]: it, they know the history of it. Like say somebody in Shahjahanabad would know what
[Guest]: Jawa Masjid is all about. But somebody living in Hauz Khas would know that there is a Neeli
[Guest]: Masjid here, which was built by a woman. And it's a functioning mosque even today. Not
[Guest]: of course as big, but still a very pretty mosque. But I think they would just bypass
[Guest]: it. They wouldn't, you know, care about it because it's not something which is something
[Guest]: that they've grown up with. Children are now interested. Like Chor Minar is something that
[Guest]: is very fascinating because you can see holes and you have these stories. It's alleged that
[Guest]: because Alauddin Khilji was fighting the Mongol menace and he was a very trying to be, you
[Guest]: know, discipline his army and take on it. So of course he had a lot of measures in place,
[Guest]: some of them which were extremely extreme. And one of them was that anybody caught, you
[Guest]: know, stealing or anybody even in weights and measures or anything like that, then they
[Guest]: could have all kinds of extreme punishments, including cutting of hands and cutting of
[Guest]: heads. And this Chor Minar is said to be the place where the heads would be hanged. So
[Guest]: this is a very macabre and interesting monument. So I think this is something maybe people
[Guest]: living around it may be fascinated by. I have no idea. But whenever I've come here, you
[Guest]: know, like Firoz Shah Kotla is said to be the city that is the famous city of the Jinns.
[Guest]: It's the fifth city of Delhi, Firoozabad. And when you go there, you'll find lots of
[Guest]: people on a Thursday coming from old Delhi. But the first time I went there and I told
[Guest]: I had come from Dubai and I took a taxi and asked my driver to take me to Firoz Shah Kotla.
[Guest]: He took me to the stadium. And I said, nahi, yeh toh nahi hai. And he said, nahi, yeh hi
[Guest]: Anil Kumble ne 10 wickets liya tha. So I said, no, that is another old monument where a king
[Guest]: used to have a castle there. So he said, achha, let us look for it. So, you know, like people
[Guest]: living in Delhi think of Firoz Shah Kotla. Of course, that stadium has been, I think,
[Guest]: renamed now. But they think of it only as a stadium where Anil Kumble took 10 wickets.
[Guest]: They don't remember that this is the fifth city of Delhi. This is where Firoz Shah ruled
[Guest]: from. But on a Thursday, you'll find that people of old Delhi, they come there in, you
[Guest]: know, in, I think, in hundreds or thousands or whatever, they come there for their mannats
[Guest]: that they make to the Jinns. And they'll come with pots of biryanis and zarda which they
[Guest]: distribute because their mannats have been or their vows have been fulfilled. So it speaks
[Guest]: differently to different people. My own driver, I asked him once, I said, you know, like,
[Guest]: I have access because whenever I go there, sometimes I tell him, I said, you know, I'll
[Guest]: be there for three, four hours and I can buy you a ticket. Would you like to come in? And
[Guest]: he says, khandro mein kya rakha hai, madam? So he can never figure out why am I so fascinated
[Guest]: by these ruins and why do I spend so much time in there? But on a Thursday, Firoz Shah
[Amit Varma]: Kotla is just something else again. No, and it just struck me, I recorded yesterday
[Amit Varma]: with Madhavi Menon, who's written the book, Infinite Variety, The History of Desire in
[Amit Varma]: India. And she was telling me about the Jamali Kamali tomb, which you also mentioned in your
[Amit Varma]: first book, Where Stones Speak. And it's so fascinating to me that that's, you know, known
[Amit Varma]: as a gay Taj Mahal. And it's, you know, there's this whole history of how Jamali and Kamali
[Amit Varma]: might have been same sex lovers or we don't know. And how the tomb has these characteristics
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, both the feminine flat surface on top and a sort of dome inside, which is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so these deeper resonances that they carry, are they sort of popularly known
[Guest]: or do you think that is starting to happen? Jamali was a Sufi saint and he was a poet.
[Guest]: He wrote some very beautiful poetry. And he was the son-in-law of another very famous
[Guest]: saint, Suharwati saint, who is also buried nearby. And the identity of the second person
[Guest]: is not known. So all these histories and all these legends have come much after him. None
[Guest]: of the contemporary histories mention anything about a Kamali. So these names, like when
[Guest]: you go to Sultan Razia's grave, they'll tell you Razia Shazia ki grave hai, because the
[Guest]: words rhyme. So there are two graves there, one is Razia, one is Shazia. Rajji Chajji,
[Guest]: that is what it's called, the sisters. So Kamali rhymes with Jamali, but none of the
[Guest]: contemporary historians talk of a Kamali or a relationship. There's been a book recently,
[Guest]: I think about four or five years ago, there was a book on it, which I did read on that.
[Guest]: And we have no idea what the relationship actually was. And he lived inside that. So
[Guest]: most of these tombs are places where the saints lived and then they were buried inside that.
[Guest]: So it could possibly have been a relationship between the two of them, or he may have just
[Guest]: been a disciple, because you do have cases of disciples and the relation between the
[Guest]: Pir-e-Murshid, like Hazrat Ramuddin and Hazrat Amir Khosrow. It was very, very close. So
[Guest]: it could be that also. Who were also, according to Madhavi, possibly same-sex lovers. Could
[Guest]: be. That's what I'm saying. I don't say it wasn't that, but what I'm just saying is that
[Amit Varma]: it has not been mentioned by anybody. So it could be like Padmavat, that it's just something
[Guest]: that came up later. So you have, and you have a lot of romantic stories which come up, like
[Guest]: for example, Razia. Now the story of her, when yesterday also I was talking to somebody
[Guest]: and the Jamia people had, they had called me for a street lecture series. So I was talking
[Guest]: to them about Razia and I said, how many of you, when you think of Razia, think of Himamalini?
[Guest]: And almost every hand went up. So when we talk of Razia Sultan made by Kamalam Ruhi
[Guest]: and we think of, you know, Himamalini and we think of Dharmendra. But in reality, none
[Guest]: of the contemporary sources ever mention a relationship between the two. The only thing
[Guest]: that is mentioned is that she made him the master of his, of tables. So one historian
[Guest]: says that when he helped her to mount the horse, he put his arms under her, hands under
[Guest]: her arms. Now he would do that the same for any other king, wouldn't he? She was wearing
[Guest]: male clothes. She had taken off her veil. In fact, as you point out in your book, she
[Guest]: was named Sultan Razia, not Razia Sultan. So he would have done the same for Iltutmush
[Guest]: also. But why then don't we talk of a relationship between him and Iltutmush? Then why only a
[Guest]: relationship between him and Razia? So these are ways which stories come up, like the Padmavati
[Guest]: story also. That has come up. Padmavati is an allegory for a Sufi story. So, of course,
[Guest]: the Piramurid relationship was very, very close. And it was something very special.
[Guest]: So what it exactly is, we have no idea. But he used to live in that. Sheikh Jamali used
[Guest]: to live inside that Gujarat. And when he died, he died in Gujarat and he had will that he
[Amit Varma]: should be buried there. And what I also find fascinating is not just that these stories
[Amit Varma]: come up, which may not often be true, but it's worth then inquiring what is the instinct
[Amit Varma]: that leads to these stories being created and propagated and believed. Like they come
[Amit Varma]: up because people want, there's something in there that attracts people and they want
[Amit Varma]: to believe. Like there's another very interesting story which you mentioned in Where Stones
[Amit Varma]: Speak, which is about the Iron Pillar. And what you pointed out about the Iron Pillar
[Amit Varma]: is that it is definitely Iltutmush we now know who got it from Udaipuri and then he
[Amit Varma]: planted it again, so to say. But there's also a legend about Anangpal having made it in
[Amit Varma]: the first place. And then there's a legend about how it goes deep into the earth and
[Amit Varma]: it rests on the head of a serpent. And I mean, it's a delightful story. And one then wonders
[Amit Varma]: that what's going on here, this mythologizing that is happening. And is it in some senses
[Amit Varma]: a version of the politics of today where you want to claim a certain piece of history and
[Amit Varma]: you want to change history to suit your ends?
[Guest]: Yes. And the best way to do it is through stories, through folk stories, through retelling
[Guest]: of the tale. So, and this, the story that you mentioned about the Iron Pillar, they
[Guest]: say that is the reason for the name Delhi also, because the original name was Dhilli
[Guest]: or Dhillika. So, they say, Killi to Dhilli bhai, Tomar bhai Matheen. So, they say, Dhilli
[Guest]: jo hai, yeh wahan se aaya hai. And because the Arabs could not say Dha, so it became
[Guest]: Delhi and Dhilli. So, these are stories which just fascinate me and I always put them down
[Guest]: because I feel that people should know that this is a story, but it's a story.
[Amit Varma]: Because as much as the history itself, the stories also reveal something because they
[Amit Varma]: are just the fact that they've survived and they're believed.
[Guest]: And oral stories also, because oral history is again a big source. And when I put it down,
[Guest]: I always make sure that I write that this is oral history, this is a story. I have not
[Guest]: found any contemporary source to reinforce this, but this is there. So that, you know,
[Guest]: like, it's at least documented that these are stories. Some of the stories are so delightful
[Guest]: and some of the stories also, you know, they tell you about that age, of how did people
[Amit Varma]: think.
[Amit Varma]: Give me an example of stories you like.
[Guest]: So there's this story in one of the books that I've translated, That City of My Heart,
[Guest]: in that the first book, Adhilli Ka Akhari Didar, the story is being told, it's written
[Guest]: by somebody else, Syed Wadi Hassan, but he has a narrator who's called Agai Begum. Now,
[Guest]: Agai Begum lived as a Mughlani. Mughlani were the seamstresses and the ladies-in-waiting
[Guest]: or whatever inside the Red Fort. So she stayed inside the Red Fort. Now, she's telling the
[Guest]: story of how things happened when they lived in the, you know, when the Mughal kings were
[Guest]: there. And she describes the Phulwalo Ki Sehr. Now, Phulwalo Ki Sehr is a historical event
[Guest]: and it still happens. And when she's describing it, she describes an anecdote, which she says
[Guest]: that, you know, like the Badshah would, how they would come all the way from the Red Fort
[Guest]: and they would come there and then, kis tare se baagon mein pakwan bhakte the. And one
[Guest]: of the stories is, I'm forgetting whether it is hers or it is theirs, because I translated
[Guest]: four stories in that. There's another book story there called Tilai Maulana Ki Jhilke.
[Guest]: In one of them, there's a story of how there was this woman seamstress and her daughter-in-law
[Guest]: finds a stone, that Paras ka patthar, jisko alchemist stone kehte. And then, of course,
[Guest]: she goes and then she calls Begum Zeenat Mahal and then she comes. And by that time the stone
[Guest]: has got thrown away. So, you know, the story is, this is definitely not true, but she's
[Guest]: recorded it. So, this story, I think, is in one of the, one of these short stories that
[Guest]: I translated. So, it's a very fascinating story that when the story describes, now,
[Guest]: the part of the alchemist stone may not be true, but the way then they describe how Begum
[Guest]: Zeenat Mahal is coming. Now, she's coming with the paan daan, with the hookah, everything
[Guest]: comes behind her. So, the entire story of that. Then the story of the Phulwalo Ki Seher
[Guest]: ki ek shakur kukkad wale the, you know, he hookah leke jaate the. Then how he would go,
[Guest]: how he would be so well-dressed and unka hookah jab jaata tha. And, you know, the entire bazaar
[Guest]: scene of how people are the saying, in the, today when we go to Mehroli, of course, that
[Guest]: Jharna is in a very bad state, but they are talking of diving competitions being held
[Guest]: there, ke waha pe aam ka baag hai, us aam ke baag mein pakwan pakra hai, you know, dahi
[Guest]: bade ban rahe hain, things like that, you know, and the varieties of alms and all that,
[Guest]: all this describes Andar Se Ki Goliya, which we still have. So, it's a continuity also.
[Amit Varma]: So, it's a history told through stories and it's also stories about history and it's all
[Amit Varma]: of these melding together, which one of the interesting things which strikes me whenever
[Amit Varma]: I read history is that sitting in the present time, looking at everything around us seems
[Amit Varma]: to be filled with certainty. So, so many of us like the conception of Delhi, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so most people, when they think of Delhi, they'll think of Lutyens Delhi, where, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so many of us come, or if you think of old Delhi, you'll think of Shahjahanabad.
[Amit Varma]: But Shahjahanabad is actually the second last Delhi in a series of many, many Delhi's and
[Amit Varma]: everything changes so fast. And all of what we know as reality is both contingent and
[Amit Varma]: extremely recent. And how does it like, you know, when you're writing about Delhi in summer,
[Amit Varma]: all these Delhi's are sort of superimposed on each other. How did you develop the gaze
[Amit Varma]: to be able to, you know, separate them out? So, as I said, that has been done according
[Guest]: to Bashiruddin Ahmed's book and Sir Syed. Both of them have clearly demarcated it. So,
[Guest]: and plus, you know, the historical, the saying of that this city was, which city was built
[Guest]: by the Tughlaq. So, you have very clearly demarcated dynasties here. So, that has never
[Guest]: been a problem because those monuments are very easy to get. They are all historically
[Guest]: documented. So, that is not a problem. It's, and most of the tombs that we see today, again,
[Guest]: that was something that I learned from Bashiruddin Ahmed, that when the Lodhi's were ruling here.
[Guest]: Now, before that, the slave kings or even the Khenjis and the Tughlaqs, they were from
[Guest]: Turkic descent, but the Lodhi's were Afghans. Now, Afghans have a kind of a tribal system
[Guest]: where each tribal king is as important as the next. So, earlier, while they could not
[Guest]: have, each noble could not have such a lavish tomb, the Lodhi's could all have their own
[Guest]: tombs. The only difference was that the king had an octagonal tomb and the rest of them
[Guest]: could have a tomb. So, Bashiruddin Ahmed says that there was a thriving business in tombs
[Guest]: today, like we have flats. So, there would be tombs ready to sell and to be bought. And
[Guest]: that's the dynasty was overturned by the Mughals and some of the tombs got left and that is
[Guest]: why maybe they are empty today. So, you know, we think of, you know, life and death are
[Guest]: so sacred and, you know, like so many of us are superstitious, but they were building
[Amit Varma]: and selling tombs. Well, there won't have been multi-story tomb
[Amit Varma]: blocks where there are apartment blocks, but that's, you know, so let's go back to the
[Amit Varma]: origins of Delhi. And this is, of course, disputed and some of it is even in the territory
[Amit Varma]: of mythology and, you know, one is never quite sure whether Indaprastha, which is supposed
[Amit Varma]: to be the first form of Delhi, sort of existed here. Now, you point out in one of your books
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, every city needs basically three things, Darya, Badal or Hakim. So, expand
[Amit Varma]: on this a little bit and then tell me what is the impetus behind sort of the early Delhi's
[Amit Varma]: that are coming up? What are they? How do they come up?
[Guest]: See, the first documented Delhi is the Tomar Delhi, of which the surviving monument is
[Guest]: Surajkund. And they lived on what is today's Mehroli, the ridge. So, that was a defensive
[Guest]: position that they took. It wasn't a very big city. So, they have reservoirs. There
[Guest]: are remains of the reservoirs over there. So, strategic is the impetus.
[Guest]: Strategic. So, for them, defense was of the most important thing. Then when the Delhi
[Guest]: Sultans come and they defeat the Chauhans and they start living there, they also occupy
[Guest]: that same space, that same Lalkot. So, there's one more thing I'd like to say. Many people,
[Guest]: I've heard them and I've heard them on TV also say that Lalkala was built by the Tomar.
[Guest]: There are definitely two red forts in Delhi, but the red fort of the Tomar is in Mehroli.
[Amit Varma]: And that's Lalkot. That's Lalkot. And this used to be called Qala-e-Mubarak. It was not
[Guest]: called Lalkala. So, today we call it Lalkala, but this was made by Shah Jahan. And the Tomar
[Guest]: Lalkot is in Mehroli. And there's a difference of 26 kilometers between the two. So, they
[Guest]: are two separate cities, two separate buildings. So, the Tomars lived in Mehroli, in the Lalkot.
[Guest]: And the Delhi Sultans came and also occupied the same space. And you have all the documents
[Guest]: of Minhaj-e-Siraj and all those who are talking of crowning, coronations taking place inside
[Guest]: that area, etc. We have a document of Sultan Razia being crowned over there, also in the
[Guest]: Qutub complex. And they lived very close to that in Qasr-e-Firoza. There's a road running
[Guest]: there, but that is where they live now. So, when we are talking of that, and then when
[Guest]: the Mongols came, they attacked all of Central Asia. India is the only place where they were
[Guest]: not successful because Alauddin Khalji took them on head on. And then he moves out of
[Guest]: Lalkot and builds the second city of Siri. And that's heavily fortified. And where is
[Guest]: that in current? Where we are sitting now? Houskhas. And Ishyat village. Ishyat village,
[Guest]: if you go, you will see the ruins of the walls and heavily fortified walls over there. So,
[Guest]: you can see that. You can see the bastions. A lot of it has been, you know, like incredibly
[Guest]: thick walls. You talk of how there were these chambers where you could walk, the soldiers
[Guest]: could walk in between. And so the change of guard. And everything would be preserved.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about how, you know, there are accounts of black rice being taken, rice that
[Amit Varma]: has turned black, but it's still perfectly eatable within those chambers. So, that is
[Guest]: how Delhi kept this thing. And then Tughlaq Abad, when Qais-ud-Din Tughlaq made that,
[Guest]: and then he had to abandon it because of lack of water. They did make bubblies inside. And
[Guest]: now there's this very famous story about, ya rahe gujar, ya rahe ujar. So, now Professor
[Guest]: Muhammad Habib says that, you know, Hazrat Naam-ud-Din Auliya was not so petty as to
[Guest]: be cursing like that. And there has to be some other reason about it. So, but this is
[Guest]: the popular perception. We all say that Ras-ud-Din Tughlaq died because of a curse by Hazrat
[Guest]: Naam-ud-Din Auliya, which he says is not true because there's nothing that bears, there's
[Guest]: nothing in history which says that, you know, there was this kind of enmity between them.
[Amit Varma]: So again, these are all stories. And also curses don't kill people.
[Guest]: I have documented all that also. I've given, so I've tried to, what I've done is that I've
[Guest]: given the popular perception as well as what the historical fact is, so that people can,
[Amit Varma]: you know. In fact, you gave some 7-8 versions of how
[Amit Varma]: the name Delhi came about. At one point, I got really confused. What's the one that you
[Guest]: think is most likely? See, Dhillika was the name that came here.
[Guest]: They say soft soil. The Singh, because the soil was soft, so it comes from that, Dhillika.
[Guest]: And then again, because Dha is something that's not in the Arabic language, so it becomes
[Guest]: Dilli. Dilli is colloquial and Dhilli is the court language, the used in the literary,
[Guest]: the Singh register. And now in the, and Hazrat-e-Dhilli is what it's called by Hazrat Amir Khosrow.
[Guest]: And then when the British come, then as per their phonology, because L could, you know,
[Guest]: has to come after H, sorry, Delhi, yes, it has to come before, L has to come before H,
[Guest]: so it becomes, instead of Delhi, it becomes Delhi. Now, this is something that was pointed
[Guest]: out to me by Shoaib Daniel, because he does a lot of work on languages and linguistics.
[Guest]: So he's the one who told me about this, why it became Delhi from Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Shout out to Shoaib, it's quite an insight. And just thinking aloud, it's also so interesting
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, we don't just have to look at historical documents, or oral history even
[Amit Varma]: to figure out what history is, that in the modern times, there are so many ways of doing
[Amit Varma]: it, like in Tony Joseph's book, for example, where you look at genetics, or like in this
[Amit Varma]: case, we got a clue through language, through linguistics, and it's all of these different
[Amit Varma]: sort of sciences and even arts coming together to shine a light on history. What's also kind
[Amit Varma]: of interesting to me is that part of what happens as newer Delhi take over older ones
[Amit Varma]: and newer rulers take over older ones, is that while there is, of course, this syncreticism
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, your culture is absorbing everything, there's also a lot of violence, and both going
[Amit Varma]: side by side, in the sense that, you know, when Qutubuddin Abaq and Iltutmish and later
[Amit Varma]: the Khiljis, and when they take over from the Tomars, there's a lot of destruction,
[Amit Varma]: they destroy all the old temples, and they build the mosque instead. And yet the pillars
[Amit Varma]: are actually made from the, like you pointed out, the pillars are those Hindu pillars,
[Guest]: so to say.
[Guest]: And the artisans would also be the same artisans, as one of the historians says, I'm forgetting,
[Guest]: I think, one of the sources which I consulted, they said, it is possible that it would be
[Guest]: the same artisan who built the temple who's now building the mosque.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's all melting together. So, you know, the calligraphy has Hindu motifs, you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, you know, you've pointed out similarly in the tomb of Iltutmish, how you
[Amit Varma]: see this meld of influences. So, it's both that destruction is happening, and yet the
[Amit Varma]: absorption of culture is happening. And, you know, later on, we see this replicated in
[Amit Varma]: colonial times. You point out in your book about how when the British built the railway
[Amit Varma]: lines, they destroyed the tomb of Zebun Nisar, Aurangzeb's daughter, and how Lutyens Delhi
[Amit Varma]: was actually, you know, a large number of tombs, graves, pavilions, wells and mansions,
[Amit Varma]: as you describe it, had to be demolished, sort of they entombed the tombs in a sense
[Amit Varma]: under Lutyens Delhi. One can look back and one can see the changes, but a lot of these
[Amit Varma]: changes were also accompanied by this sort of violence. Did that also have sort of social
[Amit Varma]: implications which last to this day?
[Guest]: So that is the part of the hakim. Dhaniya was when Firozabad, the fifth city of Delhi
[Guest]: comes and is settled near on the banks of the Yamuna. That's the first city that comes
[Guest]: on to the bank of the Yamuna because of water needs. And then, of course, Dinpanna, which
[Guest]: is Purana Qila, and then Shahjahanabad, they're all on the banks of the Yamuna because big
[Guest]: population you need water. And the hakims win them fancies. Now, which ruler doesn't
[Guest]: rule by force? I'm talking of a ruler. I'm not talking of a democracy. I'm talking of
[Guest]: a monarchy. Every monarch is by nature cruel, by nature forceful.
[Amit Varma]: Even in a democracy, a state has a monopoly on violence. And that is always implicit.
[Amit Varma]: For example, one interesting thing that struck me, which I was also going to ask you about
[Amit Varma]: is, for example, how Lalkot is inside Sanjay one, which I presume is named after Sanjay
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi. Yes. And that also, in a sense, is an act of violence that you're sort of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, trying to reclaim a piece of the past by erasing it and by putting a contemporary
[Amit Varma]: name on it. And there are also these other juxtapositions happening, like you point out
[Amit Varma]: in your book, how the remains of the Badaungate are at Kilarai, Pithora, which are at the
[Amit Varma]: Qutub Golf Club. So it's like, you know, the present takes over the past. But that's a
[Amit Varma]: different matter as far as a sort of. But anyway, sorry, that's a digression.
[Guest]: Also, the first of all is that whoever, especially the medieval rulers, stamping your authority
[Guest]: by the use of religion was always very effective because and it didn't necessarily mean that
[Guest]: those people were using religion as a tool of ruling also. This was just to stamp their
[Guest]: authority. So, you know, you dismantle the or you destroy a temple and you build a mosque.
[Guest]: You've told the population or your new subjects that, OK, we are the kings here. It's our
[Guest]: rule that is going to be perpetuated or our rule that is going to be here now. So that
[Guest]: is the first thing. The second thing is that when the rule, the
[Guest]: Muhammad Ghori's army comes here and when Qutubuddinabad starts ruling, apart from the
[Guest]: fact the symbolism of stamping their authority by destroying a temple and building a mosque.
[Guest]: The second thing is they want to build a mosque in a hurry. Where do they get everything from?
[Guest]: So then you have the reuse. So you immediately reuse what you have destroyed and you deface
[Guest]: it and you plaster. Originally, the Qutub Islam pillars were plastered. The plaster
[Guest]: has gone away now. So that is how you do it. And that is how they've always done it. And
[Guest]: if you see, there's this new book that has come out by Richard Eaton, India in the Persianate
[Guest]: age. He talks of two journeys and he talks, his book opens with the journey of Mehmood
[Guest]: Ghazni coming to Somnath and Rajinder Chola going from the south to Bengal. And he says
[Guest]: both the journeys are very similar and both of the journeys culminate in destroying the
[Guest]: temple. But of course, Ghazni destroys the Shivling and the idol in Somnath, whereas
[Guest]: the Chola Kings brings it back and installs it in his kingdom. So these are again stamping
[Guest]: their authority via religion because he was of the same religion. He brought it and he
[Guest]: brought it here, but he did not leave it there. And he does attack it. And so these are, you
[Guest]: know, symbolism, which religion is a very big symbol. And that is why it's always been
[Guest]: used as a tool of oppression, as a tool of sometimes, you know, like empowerment or sometimes
[Guest]: to give power also to the people. Like we were talking of stories. One of my favorite
[Guest]: stories is a book written by Faratullah Baig called Phoolwalon ki Sehr. I talk a lot about
[Guest]: Phoolwalon ki Sehr because for me that symbolizes what Delhi was in the...
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about Phoolwalon ki Sehr.
[Guest]: Okay. So Phoolwalon ki Sehr starts in the 1820s. There's this ruler, Bahadur Shah's
[Guest]: father, Akbar Shah II. Akbar Shah II has a son called Mirza Jahangir. Mirza Jahangir
[Guest]: was very a favorite of the king, obviously, and very impetuous. And he gets into a fight
[Guest]: with the British resident. And that is the time when the British resident was ruling
[Amit Varma]: Delhi.
[Guest]: So he has to shoot the British resident, you pointed out, from the roof.
[Guest]: Yes, he shoots at him. He calls him a Lulu. So then, of course, the seaton is told that
[Guest]: Lulu means pearl and he's giving you a compliment. Of course, you know, Lulu means something
[Guest]: else in Urdu and Hindi, which is the language was spoken by then. So he accepts it. Then
[Guest]: he shoots at him and then he's exiled.
[Amit Varma]: And an orderly dies.
[Guest]: An orderly dies and he's exiled and sent to Allahabad. And his mother then vowed that
[Guest]: if he comes back, I will, you know, walk all the way to Qutubuddin Bakhtiar Kaki's Dargah
[Guest]: in Mehrauli and offer a chadar there. And then at that time, Akbar Shah says that, OK,
[Guest]: if you're going there, then you must offer a chadar or a chhatr to the temple of Yogmaya.
[Guest]: Yogmaya is Krishnaji's sister that got exchanged in the jail. So that is how it starts. And
[Guest]: then earlier it would be that on a Thursday they would offer the chhatr on Yogmaya and
[Guest]: on Friday they would take the chadar to the Dargah and that continued. And then the phool
[Guest]: walon, it's called Sair-e-Gulfarosh because the flower vendors also, you know, scattered
[Guest]: flowers all over the way. And then even today, if you see a lot of floral tribute is paid
[Guest]: in any urs, you have a lot of flowers and a lot of floral tribute of the floral chadars
[Guest]: and et cetera, et cetera. So Farhatullah Beg records a story of the Sair-e-Gulfarosh, which
[Guest]: happened in 1846 or something during the reign of Bahadur Shah Zafar. He's, of course, writing
[Guest]: in 60s or 70s. And he talks of that time and he says that at the time, and of course, there
[Guest]: was some power left with Bahadur Shah and he talks of it that, you know, like he's describing
[Guest]: it and he says that the people come and they pass by Zafar Mahal, which is the palace,
[Guest]: the summer palace of the Mughals and the balconies where they would come to watch the procession
[Guest]: going by. And he's asked to come to the Dargah. As I said, the Mandir was a day earlier and
[Guest]: the next. And he says that I didn't go to the Mandir, so how can I go to the Dargah?
[Guest]: My people will be so sad that the king didn't go to the Mandir and went to the Dargah. So
[Guest]: he doesn't go to the Dargah because he has not been able to go to the Mandir as he was
[Guest]: not well. So for me, this is what Delhi was. And this is what we keep talking of the Ganga
[Guest]: Jamuni, Tehzeeb or the syncretism. This is what it was. And that is why everybody fought
[Guest]: the first war of independence under Bahadur Shah Zafar's banner, even whether it was Nana
[Guest]: Saheb or Tatya Tope or Laxmibai, it was all under his banner. And when we, this is, of
[Guest]: course, a story which has been written some years later, but Zaheer Dehlvi, when he's
[Guest]: writing Dastane Ghadar, he's writing it. He, of course, does also write it later on, but
[Guest]: he was an eyewitness to all the things that were happening during the, what he calls the
[Guest]: Ghadar. And he describes this incident, which happened much before 1857, where he says that
[Guest]: one day Bahadur Shah, you know, like in the morning, they would give Jharokha Darshan
[Guest]: and that balcony is still there. The Jamuna was over there in the morning, the Hindu ladies
[Guest]: and the men would come out for their snan and they would do the Ganga Snan and the other,
[Guest]: the non-Hindus and the Muslims and all, they would come and they would all assemble under
[Guest]: the Jharokha and they would come and see his face and then go about their daily business.
[Amit Varma]: Sounds like what happens outside Amitabh Bachchan's bungalow in Bombay.
[Guest]: Something like that. So he comes there and he sees that on the bank of the Yamuna, there
[Guest]: are these tents and he asks them, who are you and why are you here? He sends somebody
[Guest]: there and he finds out that these are the butchers and they've been told by the British
[Guest]: that you can no longer stay here because of the work you're doing. It's, you know, spoiling
[Guest]: the city. And so he calls his, there's not much he can do. He cannot overturn the order.
[Guest]: So he calls his Wazir and he says,
[Guest]: Mera Kheema bhi wahi laga do.
[Guest]: And of course, the minute his Kheema goes there and he goes there and his tent is also
[Guest]: pitched next to the butchers, the resident, the British resident comes running and says,
[Guest]: Huzoor, what are you doing? And he says, I have to stay with my people. He says, after
[Guest]: I leave, you can do whatever you want. But as long as I'm there, I am with my people.
[Guest]: And he says, he uses the analogy, he says, the flesh can never be separated from the
[Guest]: nail. Naakhoon se ghosht alag nahin ho sakta hai. And he stays there. So that happens.
[Guest]: And then we say that a few months down the line, the ghosis, that is the doodhwalas,
[Guest]: the ghosis and the doodhwalas would, of course, the butchers would have been Muslim, but the
[Guest]: ghosis and the doodhwalas would not have been Muslim. He said the same thing happened and
[Guest]: they come and they also come and pitch that and then says that they've been asked to leave
[Guest]: the city because of the, that whatever they're doing, the work is hampering the beautification
[Guest]: of the city or whatever it is that the British are doing. So again, he says the same thing.
[Guest]: Mera kheema wahi laga do. And he goes there and the British come. Then he says, you know,
[Guest]: you cannot separate me from my people. And as long as I am here, my people will be with
[Guest]: me. He says, after I go, tum eet se eet baja dena. Delhi ki eet se eet baja dena. Lekin
[Guest]: jab tak main hoon, mere log mere saath rehenge. So this is how he treated his subjects. And
[Guest]: when Zaheer Dahilvi is writing, the title that he gives is Badshaah ki Raiya Parwari.
[Guest]: That how he treated his subjects. Equal, always. So, you know, these and I see no reason not
[Guest]: to believe what Zaheer Dahilvi is writing because he would have been an eyewitness.
[Guest]: He was the Badshaah's courtier. So he would be going there. He was a kind of a page. So
[Guest]: he would be going there every day. And he was also his a poet. So he would go there
[Guest]: with his verse and all that. So he would have seen everything that was happening. So this
[Guest]: is the kind of Delhi that there was in the late, say in the 1840s, 1830s, 1840s, 1850s
[Amit Varma]: till 1857. And the tragedy of history is that eventually
[Amit Varma]: he did leave the city on the British, as you can say, eat, say it like, you know, and that
[Amit Varma]: happened. And it's also interesting here, you know, going back to that earlier theme
[Amit Varma]: about how stories are propagated and myths are made to suit political purposes, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I grew up learning in school that Bahadur Shah Zafar was a very, you know, ineffectual,
[Amit Varma]: weak sort of ruler. And these sort of statesman like qualities are just not part of those
[Amit Varma]: stories. And it all kind of depends on who's telling those stories and where they have
[Amit Varma]: come from. How would you tease out issues of reliability? Because a lot of sources are
[Amit Varma]: people who are close to the protagonists. Some might be writing two centuries after
[Amit Varma]: what has happened when you can't be sure whether they'll be correct. In fact, for a certain
[Amit Varma]: period, you point out that most of the sources are Turkish or Persian sources, there aren't
[Amit Varma]: so many Indian sources about the lives of those sultans. So how does that exercise happen?
[Amit Varma]: Because if someone's writing the history of something that happened in the 20th and 19th
[Amit Varma]: century, I guess there are enough sources that you can collate them all and get a very
[Amit Varma]: good sense. But if you're writing about something that happened in the 12th century or the 11th
[Guest]: century.
[Guest]: So that is also an area of concern that most of the histories that were written of the
[Guest]: Delhi sultans, obviously, they were in Persian, and they were translated by Eliot and Dawson
[Guest]: as history of India as told by its historians. And as many historians have pointed out, they
[Guest]: focused only on one aspect of the rulers because they were trying to show that the British
[Guest]: are the rulers who've come as saviors of the Indians. So you have a lot of commentaries
[Guest]: written on those histories also that this is where they've misinterpreted it, this is
[Guest]: where they've gone wrong. So anyone who's a serious student of history goes through
[Guest]: the commentaries also to see what is there. You go through more than one translation.
[Guest]: I don't know Farsi myself, although of course I read. So Farsi, I have to go through more
[Guest]: than one translation. Sometimes I have to go and see the translations, how they've been
[Guest]: used and mentioned by other historians, historians whom I rely on and find credible. And as far
[Guest]: as the Zaheer Dahalvi is concerned, now he ran from pillar to post hiding from the British.
[Guest]: So his escape is a very, very interesting part of the journey apart from the story of
[Guest]: the Ghadar itself. And when he's writing it on his deathbed, he is living in British India.
[Guest]: So for him to be praising the king who has been exiled by the British, it was an act
[Guest]: of bravery and it was also an act of resistance. So I see no reason why he would be, you know,
[Guest]: like coloring it because that's why I feel that the history that was written either in
[Guest]: the 19th century or in the, by ordinary people, I'm not talking of court histories, or in
[Guest]: the late 19th century, early 20th century, there was at that time, not that agenda. See,
[Guest]: we are not, we don't have a right or a left or a centrist or, you know, there's no secular
[Guest]: history and liberal history and, you know, religious history kind of those angles that
[Guest]: are given to us, the names that we are given today, they are just writing things as they
[Guest]: see it and as they perceive it. So those histories, of course, are colored by a little bit of
[Guest]: whatever their feelings are, but there's much more truth in what they're writing when they're
[Amit Varma]: describing the society. At least they won't sort of get the basic
[Guest]: facts wrong. Even if the facts are not there, actually the thought that they're describing
[Guest]: has to be there because where else do they get it from?
[Amit Varma]: Fair point. Let's, let's take a quick commercial break and talk more about the history of Delhi
[Amit Varma]: when we come back.
[Amit Varma]: book club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book every week, giving context,
[Amit Varma]: giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen to my show. And as long
[Amit Varma]: as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend an audio
[Amit Varma]: book that I liked on that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is Everybody
[Amit Varma]: Lies by Seth Stephens Ravidovitz. In this book, Stephens Ravidovitz examines data from
[Amit Varma]: Google, Facebook, Wikipedia, and various porn sites to see what people tend to search for,
[Amit Varma]: and to see if this can hold insights into their essential nature. After all, all through
[Amit Varma]: life you're putting on the front, signaling and pretending, but there is no pretense in
[Amit Varma]: what we search for when we are alone online. Our true selves stand revealed. It's an eye
[Amit Varma]: opening book, and you can listen to it on Storytel. Everybody Lies by Seth Stephens
[Amit Varma]: Ravidovitz. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember, let's Storytel with
[Amit Varma]: a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Rana Safi, the outstanding historian
[Amit Varma]: of Delhi and Delhi's monuments. She's written a fabulous trilogy, which sort of puts all
[Amit Varma]: of Delhi's archaeology into historical context and architecture into historical context.
[Amit Varma]: And what also struck me in a question I had while reading it is that, you know, just as
[Amit Varma]: people make the architecture around them, can architecture also shape the people who
[Amit Varma]: live there? Like, can architecture itself, the nature of the architecture, shape a society?
[Guest]: Let's take the example of Jama Masjid. I think it does shape. Even today, it's a symbol of,
[Guest]: you know, old Delhi, like when you had this, the recent protest marches that you had, the
[Guest]: Bhim Ami Chandrashekhar Azad, he started it from Jama Masjid in 1900 and I think 11 or
[Guest]: 14, whatever it was just during the British period. He's asked by the Imam to come and
[Guest]: deliver a lecture from the member of the Jama Masjid. And Kishtilu is given the keys of
[Guest]: the Golden Temple and asked to, you know, go there. So this kind of importance and exchange
[Guest]: because of the importance of the building. So yes, definitely, Jama Masjid is a masjid,
[Guest]: it's a mosque and it plays a very important part in the roles of the believers, but it's
[Guest]: also a symbol of Delhi. And that is why it was confiscated after 1857 by the British.
[Guest]: It took a long time and a lot of negotiation for them to get it back. So it was seen as
[Guest]: a symbol. So of course, architecture also does shape people and history.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, a quick bit of trivia for my listeners, Swami Shraddhanand, in fact, was
[Amit Varma]: also, his name was Munshi Ram and he was, in fact, given the title of Mahatma before
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi himself was. So in a sense, he was the Mahatma before the Mahatma. And this speech
[Amit Varma]: that he gave at the Jama Masjid is considered a great iconic moment because to call a Hindu
[Amit Varma]: leader like that to speak at the Jama Masjid was sort of an example of that Hindu-Muslim
[Amit Varma]: sort of relationship getting so much better at the time.
[Guest]: And they say that when he finished, there were, you know, sounds of Hindu-Muslim Ekta
[Guest]: Zindabad all over the mosque. And then again in 1947, after partition, Maulana Abul Kalam
[Guest]: Azad speaks to the Muslims from there and tells them not to migrate. And he said, this
[Guest]: is your country. So again, that is again a very iconic speech where he talks of what
[Guest]: India means for the Muslims and why they should stay back here. So, yes, it has shaped, it
[Guest]: has been a very important part of Delhi and of people's history.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me more about the other Delhi's, you know, in the sense that, first of all, how
[Amit Varma]: many Delhi's were there? Because you have also given different versions in your book
[Amit Varma]: where you have said maybe there were 14, maybe there were seven. And all I could really register
[Amit Varma]: was that, okay, the last two are Shahjahanabad, which we call Old Delhi and Lutyens Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: which we call New Delhi. And of course, you know, you have Tomar's Delhi, but I don't
[Amit Varma]: know where to place that in the numbering. And, you know, so take me through the, you
[Amit Varma]: know, all the Delhi's that are sort of emerging.
[Guest]: So the seven cities of Delhi, I think is a very romantic idea that's come from the seven
[Guest]: cities of Rome. Okay, because you have this book by Gautam Hearn, which is called the
[Guest]: seven cities of Delhi. So it's very obviously, you know, inspired by that. But when Sir Sayyed
[Guest]: is talking, he talks, and even when Bashiruddin Ahmed is talking, they start with Indraprasth.
[Guest]: So and they say that, you know, this is a mythological city, excavations are still going
[Amit Varma]: on to prove it.
[Amit Varma]: But there's no proof.
[Guest]: As yet not, but they're still excavating. So after that, then the first reference that
[Guest]: we have that Delhi, there was a thing Delhi is in 250 BC, you have Ashoka edict. It's
[Guest]: a minor edict, but in East of Kailash, you find it. But the fact that no Buddhist text
[Guest]: mentions a city called Delhi or Dehlu or whatever or Delhi or anything resembling the present
[Guest]: name means that it wasn't anything much because they are talking of Mathura where they are
[Guest]: going, but they're not talking of this area. So the first references we really get are
[Guest]: from the Tomars, which is 1059, you point out as 726 is the time when Tomars come and
[Guest]: Lalkot is settled by Anangpal in the 10th century.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's an interesting anecdote you share about the Indraprastha times where
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how Yudhishthira one day uncovered his food and he found a fly in the food and
[Amit Varma]: he said enough, you know, this is I want purity and I don't want this and then he goes off
[Amit Varma]: and lives in the Himalayas. And I, you know, when I read that, I just thought of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the air in Delhi today and what Yudhishthira would kind of think of it. So what would you
[Amit Varma]: date as a first Delhi, then the city established by Tomar and then by Lalkot, that's the documented
[Amit Varma]: history. The first documented city of Delhi is Lalkot.
[Guest]: And that's, you know, again, Aravalli Hills because strategic reasons and all of that.
[Guest]: Then in between, like I've given in my first book, I've given 14 cities. Now these cities,
[Guest]: they were the cities like you have Khizrabad and you have various rulers made their capitals,
[Guest]: Kilukdi and all that, but they were not as such very big cities. They were more of the
[Guest]: places of where they lived and places developed around them. So a fully developed city as
[Guest]: in with its everything of its own are these seven.
[Amit Varma]: And around what time does Delhi become really significant? Because again, you know, today
[Amit Varma]: we think of Delhi as India's capital and always such a great city and all that. But as you
[Amit Varma]: point out that in the early centuries of the millennium, travellers would not even mention
[Amit Varma]: Delhi if they were travelling through the area, they talk about Mathura and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but Delhi never got a mention. Mathura was seems like the big like cosmopolis of the
[Amit Varma]: age. Around what time does Delhi start to become politically significant and as a city
[Guest]: it grows?
[Guest]: See, after the invasion of the of Muhammad Ghori, because even Pirthi Raj Chauhan was
[Guest]: ruling from Ajmer. He gets it from his grandfather. He gets Delhi, the Kingdom of Delhi from his
[Guest]: grandfather Anangpal Thomas, but his capital is Ajmer. So it's only when the Delhi Sultans
[Guest]: come here and they make it their capital and they start expanding from here, they expand
[Guest]: their kingdom. That is when Delhi really becomes an important city. And then in between, of
[Guest]: course, the Mughals, they go to Agra and then it comes back with Shah Jahan brings the capital
[Amit Varma]: of the empire back to Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when you sort of look at the history of Delhi as a historian, do you watch
[Amit Varma]: out for the danger of romanticizing the past?
[Guest]: You know, yes, you know, when I first started writing, I had not learned the craft of writing
[Guest]: or anything like that. I just wrote very, you know, as it came to me. So these are things
[Guest]: which I never realized that I'm doing or not doing. It's only when the reviews of my first
[Guest]: book came out and I was very surprised, you know, somebody wants to review my book. And
[Guest]: then they talked about this. It's only after two or three books that I realized that these
[Guest]: are the traps that I should not fall into. I hadn't been doing it. But yes, romanticizing
[Guest]: is something that comes very naturally to somebody who is looking up to a particular
[Guest]: period or a particular place or a particular monument. But that is a trap that a historian
[Amit Varma]: should not fall into.
[Guest]: What are the other traps?
[Guest]: Of being biased. These two things I have to be very careful about. Not to be biased, to
[Guest]: try and put everything as carefully as I can. And, you know, like let the reader make their
[Guest]: own choices based on whatever evidence that you are giving. And the other is, of course,
[Guest]: not to romanticize, though that is something that's a little difficult. But bias is something
[Guest]: which I am very careful about, that my own biases should not come into the book. I am
[Guest]: a documenting history, so I have to document it as faithfully as I can.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also complicated, isn't it? Because there's always a trade-off, I think historians
[Amit Varma]: have, you know, tend to be careful of, where on the one hand, you want to chronicle faithfully
[Amit Varma]: and let the facts speak for themselves. But on the other hand, if you just chronicle without,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it becomes dry. So if you're giving perspective, that perspective will necessarily
[Guest]: come from you and what you bring to the person.
[Guest]: Then it should be my opinion. It should not be given as a blanket opinion. So these are
[Guest]: things that you have to be careful about. We must not be judgmental. That's another
[Guest]: thing that has to be, you know, because when you're writing about history, something which
[Guest]: happened say 500 years ago, a thousand years ago, we cannot judge them according to today's
[Guest]: standards. And that is something which is happening very often today. We say, for example,
[Guest]: say we would judge what Pitsviraj Chauhan did, or Akbar did, or Aurangzeb did, or Ashoka
[Guest]: did. We can't judge them by what is happening today, or by how we behave today. They behaved
[Guest]: as they did according to the circumstances of the age they lived in. And that is why
[Guest]: I said this book by Richard Eaton, India in the Persianate Age, is a very good book because
[Guest]: it places everything exactly the way it is, and how you should look at it, how you should
[Guest]: look at history.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's a dilemma that keeps coming up, especially in this modern age, where we
[Amit Varma]: are so quick to pass judgment on the past. And this is not even like the old past of
[Amit Varma]: Babur, it's the recent past, we just keep passing judgment based on contemporary values.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I sort of get from reading history is how it humanizes these people for
[Amit Varma]: me. Like, you know, in Ira McCarty's history, for example, I learned about, you know, there's
[Amit Varma]: a scene she describes about how, when the women in Babur's family are brought to Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: and he is so excited to meet his wife, that he runs out of the palace barefoot and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, runs out on the street, which an emperor is not supposed to do. And suddenly this person
[Amit Varma]: who is otherwise caricatured as a brutal emperor who demolished temples and all of that, and
[Amit Varma]: this sort of this human aspect to him. And it's interesting that, you know, when you're
[Amit Varma]: writing about sort of, you could say in a very dry way that you're writing about architecture,
[Amit Varma]: you're writing about buildings, but you're also writing about people. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how did the way that you look at the city change as you started, you know, delving deeper
[Guest]: into it?
[Guest]: So, it's the, if I'm looking at a monument, that monument has been made by someone. So,
[Guest]: what was the reason for that? Like, say, Humayun's tomb, for example, it's made by his wife,
[Guest]: it's made by his eldest wife. His favorite wife is Hamida Bano Begum. But the tomb is
[Guest]: not made by his favorite wife, it's made by his eldest wife, who was also his cousin and
[Guest]: with whom he did not really get along well, because she was very opinionated and very,
[Guest]: you know, like, wasn't afraid to speak her mind. So, but it's she who makes the tomb,
[Guest]: she who stays there and makes it her life mission to look after it. So, that's something
[Guest]: very important that, you know, like, when we think of it today, that we would say, you
[Guest]: know, like, Hamida Bano is the favorite wife, she is a wife who's very opinionated, who's,
[Guest]: you know, not afraid to speak her mind. So, when we think, and Akbar, the son, is Hamida
[Guest]: Bano's son. So, he's the ruler. So, he's the one who's giving the funds or whatever
[Guest]: it is that, you know, it would, logically, everybody would think it's Hamida Bano who
[Guest]: should be making this tomb, but it's not. It's Haji Begum, Bega Begum, who's making
[Guest]: it. So, for me, that is, again, something very interesting, that why is it that she's
[Guest]: making the tomb and not Hamida Bano? So, and there's a lot of confusion at times, people,
[Guest]: that's why I've discussed it in my book, that, you know, it is not Hamida Bano, it is Haji
[Guest]: Begum, and Haji Begum was Bega Begum, who was the eldest wife. That is she who's making
[Guest]: the tomb, and, you know, that's so fascinating. And even in a, say, let's say, talk about
[Guest]: the, or Qutub Minar, because that, again, is something very fascinating, that the Qutub
[Guest]: Minar had only four stories, and there's a lightning strike, and the third one, the top
[Guest]: one falls off, and when Feroz Shah repairs it, he makes one more. Today's conservationists,
[Guest]: if they were to do anything like that, their heads would roll. But when he's doing it,
[Guest]: he decides, okay, I must have something here also, so he makes two more, two, he makes
[Guest]: it five. So, these are things which are very fascinating, that when you're making, how
[Guest]: the person who's making it is trying to perpetuate his memory also, along with looking, conserving
[Guest]: what is there. And the names, like, this was called Mazina, or the Mohsen's Tower. Saab,
[Guest]: they say, the Qutub Minar, the word is first used in the 17th, 18th century by a British
[Guest]: called Ensign Blunt. And the story is that the Qutub Saab ki laat hai, because a Sufi
[Guest]: saint is supposed to have a staff, which connects him to heaven. And because Qutub Saab is such
[Guest]: an important saint for Mehroli, in fact, they say the name Mehroli comes from his meher
[Guest]: or his blessing. So, of course, he has to have a laat, which touches the heavens. So,
[Amit Varma]: Qutub Minar becomes his laat. And this is something people often assume the Qutub Minar
[Amit Varma]: is named after Qutubuddin Aibak, but of course, it's named after Khwaja Qutubuddin Bakhtiyar
[Amit Varma]: Kaki. And you also told a delightful story about where the Kaki part of the name comes
[Guest]: from. So, kindly, kindly tell. So, that is a story that, you know, like, all Sufi saints
[Guest]: were, jisko faqirana ek zindagi kehte the, asli mein faqirana zindagi, us tariki zindagi
[Guest]: jeete the, they would never, especially the Sishti saints, would never keep any money
[Guest]: for themselves, even when they got gifts and futu, any kind of gifts that had to be distributed
[Guest]: the same day. So, they were always living a hand-to-mouth existence. And Hazrat Bakhtiyar
[Guest]: Kaki's wife has to borrow money or has to be in debt for the bread that she's taking.
[Guest]: And so, there are two versions to that. So, one is that, you know, he tells her that,
[Guest]: you know, I'm not going to give you any more credit. And so, Bakhtiyar Kaki says that,
[Guest]: you know, it doesn't matter. It will come to you. And then, of course, the bread starts
[Guest]: coming, appearing every day for them in a shelf. So, these are his miracles and how
[Guest]: the name Bakhtiyar comes, that ikhtiyar jiska hai. So, you know, like, and I am, you know,
[Guest]: very attached to the Khutub Sahib because I feel he had a big role to play in my coming
[Guest]: to Delhi. I feel that, you know, I had nothing to do with Delhi. As I said, Delhi has adopted
[Guest]: me. I never lived here. I wasn't from Delhi. But when I came to Delhi in 2012 and I went
[Guest]: to his dargah, there's something that pulled me to Delhi. And after that, I've been coming,
[Guest]: I was living in Dubai. My husband was in Dubai. I just packed my bag. He said, OK, you want
[Guest]: to go there? You want to write? That's OK. So, I packed our luggage, got a container,
[Guest]: booked the container. He shifted to a flat. I packed the villa and I came here and shifted
[Guest]: here. And then I started living here. Something which I'd always thought that I would never
[Guest]: ever live in Delhi or NRC. We had always thought that when we retire, we'd live in Pune because
[Guest]: we'd spent 15 years in Pune and where we had a house.
[Amit Varma]: And Pune is, of course, a very charming city where I studied. Are you then able to articulate
[Amit Varma]: what it was about, you know, this that brought you back?
[Guest]: No, this is something that cannot be put in words because Sufism is in something I've
[Guest]: been, you know, like as a Shia, I've been going to Imam Bada's and to Raza's, which
[Guest]: is of the Prophet and the Imams, Hazrat Ali and his children. I've been going to that
[Guest]: since childhood. I visited almost all the Raza's in Iran, Iraq, Syria and Saudi Arabia
[Guest]: and in India. And so that was something I've been doing. But Sufism wasn't something that
[Guest]: I was connected to, though Hazrat Ali is said to be the first Sufi. So for me, you know,
[Guest]: like it was more as a, you know, the Shia part of it rather than the Sufism part of
[Guest]: it, that was something that I'd been connected to. So it's only when I came in 2012, I started
[Guest]: going on walks with Asif the Helvi, who runs Delhi Karwan. So he lives in Mehroli and he
[Guest]: is the one who started talking to me about Sufism. And he took me to Qutub Sahib Targah
[Guest]: and there's something there that, you know, then drew me to Sufism. And today I like,
[Guest]: of course, I can't say I'm a Sufi because that is a very long journey. But there's something
[Guest]: about Sufism that attracts me, the simplicity of that. And I feel it's a natural corollary
[Guest]: of since I'm a great believer of Hazrat Ali, that Hazrat Ali and Sufis all take, as I said,
[Guest]: they take their chart, their descent from Hazrat Ali. So I feel that it's a very natural
[Guest]: journey for me to be able to coming from Ali to the Sufis of Delhi. So there's something
[Guest]: about it. I can't explain it, but I feel that it is Qutub Sahib who asked me to stay in
[Guest]: Delhi and to, you know, write about Delhi. And you also mentioned that you started learning
[Amit Varma]: Urdu again, rediscovering Urdu as it were. And so through this process of sort of figuring
[Amit Varma]: out the history of Delhi, and you're also obviously reading a lot of Urdu sources at
[Amit Varma]: this time, you're translating these Urdu books on Delhi. Did that sort of deepen your appreciation
[Amit Varma]: for Urdu literature and culture? And also, is there a sort of Urdu renaissance happening?
[Amit Varma]: Like I also see Rekhta happening and more and more people are getting interested in
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: The renaissance that's happening in Urdu is only in the spoken language and the poetry.
[Guest]: It's not happening in the script. Because people who do want to speak, see we've always
[Guest]: spoken in North India, we've spoken Hindustani, which is a soft version of Urdu itself, using
[Guest]: a lot of Persian and Hindi words in it. But script, very few people know, and the script
[Guest]: is dying. And when the script dies, the literature and the history dies. And in that sense, I
[Guest]: would not say it's a renaissance. Because further, a language isn't only about poetry.
[Guest]: A language is about, of course, a lot of the literature is again translated into English,
[Guest]: but then you lose the nuance. And what about the history that's written in that? As I said,
[Guest]: there's so much of history in that language. And there are so many, we are losing the dialects.
[Guest]: We're losing Urdu on a daily basis. So the Rekhta is also only promoting the poetry.
[Guest]: The biggest service that Rekhta is doing, to my mind, is that they have digitalized
[Guest]: all the old Urdu text. So they are there, but then you have to know the script to be
[Guest]: able to read them. So, of course, they're there for scholars, but the common person
[Guest]: has, they're running classes also. But it's, you know, as a language, unless you know the
[Guest]: script, the language is in danger.
[Amit Varma]: And one question that's always struck me when I've read something translated from one language
[Amit Varma]: to another, when I happen to understand both of them, you know, is translation even possible?
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me that languages are fundamentally so different from each other, that in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you are having to recreate the essence of something. You can't just translate word-to-word.
[Amit Varma]: What was your process of learning how to translate like?
[Guest]: As I said, again, I started translating without giving much thought to it. And the first book
[Guest]: that I translated was Daftane Qadar. And that is, again, a very interesting story. I was
[Guest]: reading the last Mughal by Dalrymple, and he says that the book called Daftane Qadar,
[Guest]: and I'm surprised nobody's translated it. I said, okay, let me try that. So I took the
[Guest]: book and I started. So the first thing was to get a copy of it, because I didn't have
[Guest]: a very good print over here in, couldn't find a very good print of it in Delhi. So anyway,
[Guest]: I was in Dubai, so I could get a print from Pakistan, then I got one from Raza Library.
[Guest]: So I started with that. Now, I think there was recently a debate on Faiz. So on that,
[Guest]: also something that I was talking, I mentioned that in a couple of my tweets and something
[Guest]: that I've written, that any language, any literature depends heavily on the religious
[Guest]: iconography of the language that it's writing on. Say, for example, P.G. Wodehouse, I'm
[Guest]: a big P.G. Wodehouse fan. But when you read P.G. Wodehouse, if you do not know your Bible,
[Guest]: if you do not know your hymns, you will not understand all the psalms. You don't understand
[Guest]: half of what he's writing. You know, like he'll keep referring as pants the heart when
[Guest]: heated in the chase. Now that's a hymn. So you have to know all that to be able to understand
[Guest]: what he's talking about. So we don't call, you know, these are references which you've
[Guest]: grown up with. So similarly, when you're translating from the language, so for Urdu, so though
[Guest]: Urdu, I was still a work in progress, but the culture was something I was very invested
[Guest]: in. I knew everything about that, the culture and the language and the religion. So that
[Guest]: was the biggest challenge was how to translate that. Like in one place, Zaheer Dahilvi writes
[Guest]: in one of the descriptions of Doomsday is that the sun will be a yard and a quarter
[Guest]: above your head. So you have to know that. So when you're writing that, so when you're
[Guest]: describing it, unless you know the reference. Now, somebody who doesn't know the Quranic
[Guest]: reference to how Doomsday is described, and that is what is there in one of Faiz's poem.
[Guest]: He describes it exactly the way it's given in the Quran, you know, the fluffs of the saying
[Guest]: what's going to happen on Doomsday. So when you're invested in that language, in the culture
[Guest]: and the religion, you're able to use that iconography. So that whichever language, whichever
[Guest]: writer you're doing it. So when you are doing it, translation for me, it's not how good
[Guest]: you are in the language itself. It's how good you understand, how well you understand the
[Guest]: nuances. Like one very interesting anecdote. I did a lot of reading for translating Dastanikadar
[Guest]: to understand what he's trying to do because I've given a lot of notes in that so that
[Guest]: people understand what is happening because he's writing it and at times it's erratic
[Guest]: and so that, you know, you understand completely what he's writing. And I wanted that to be
[Guest]: there instead of just translation. So there in one place he mentions, when he's talking
[Guest]: of, and all these platoons and regiments from all over the place are coming to Delhi to
[Guest]: fight against the British. So he says, Now I kept looking at all the maps everywhere.
[Guest]: I asked people, I said, where is the Safar Meena? Nobody could tell me, there's no place
[Guest]: called Safar Meena. So then finally, I had a whole lot of questions, which I marked and
[Guest]: for me, any questions I have in Urdu, I go to Professor Shamsur Rahman Farooqui. So he
[Guest]: was coming to Delhi, he told me, so whatever you have, you just bring all your questions
[Guest]: to me and we'll sit and discuss them. This was before it was the final edit. So I took
[Guest]: it to him and then of course he told me this, this, this and then I asked him, I said, Sir,
[Guest]: where is Safar Meena? So he started laughing. He said, that's sappers and miners. So that
[Guest]: because he, and he told me, he said, you know, even I have wondered where it was, but then
[Guest]: because he had read somewhere and he could correlate that, you know, sappers and miners
[Guest]: had come there and so he had read it in some other book somewhere. And then recently somebody
[Guest]: else told me that in Bengal, there was a sapper and miner regiment and that place was called
[Guest]: Safar Meena. So, you know, this is how, that is why it's so difficult at times. If this
[Guest]: is a very simple thing, I could have written Safar Meena there, but then it wouldn't have,
[Guest]: you know, the reader wouldn't have understood what is this Safar Meena. They would have
[Guest]: also wondered like me, Safar Meena hai kidar? You know, things like this, when you're translating,
[Guest]: like whenever I was translating Asaru Sanadeet. Now Asaru Sanadeet is in two editions. There
[Guest]: are two editions of it. The first edition is written in 1846 and the second one is in
[Guest]: 1854. And the first one is written when he writes, he writes, Sir Syed writes it in a
[Guest]: very Persianized style. The second one is, of course, very, it's a simple Urdu one. So
[Guest]: I started when I did it because I was using it for my own work when I was just writing
[Guest]: the Delhi trilogy. So I was referring to the second edition only. And I had translated
[Guest]: most of it for my own notes. And then I said, OK, why not, you know, translate this book?
[Guest]: And then while I was translating that, I came to know that there is another edition and
[Guest]: that's much more interesting. So that had all the anecdotes and all the spicy stories
[Guest]: and everything. So then I hunted for that. I got a copy of that. And the monuments or
[Guest]: something which are very easy for me because I had visited all the monuments that he talks
[Guest]: about the 130 monuments. I knew them inside out. So when whatever he's talking about,
[Guest]: I could understand what he's saying. But then there is a chapter in that which is Dilli
[Guest]: Aur Dilli Ke Log. Now, that chapter is supposed to be one of the most important chapters of
[Guest]: that book, which he hasn't included in the second edition. Now, this chapter was very,
[Guest]: very Persianized Urdu. And in that he talks about, he gives each and every person that
[Guest]: he gives them titles. Those were, you know, they just sailed over my head. So I had a
[Guest]: Mufti Sahib who would help me with the Persian part of it because he knew Persian and Arabic.
[Guest]: So I called him and I said, whenever I had a problem with Persian and Arabic, I would
[Guest]: call him. So he came and I said, he started reading and, you know, there's no punctuation
[Guest]: mark in the book. So it was Xerox of the time. I hadn't even got a, you know, a fresh copy.
[Guest]: So we just could not figure out what are they saying? Where does one title end? Where does
[Guest]: the second end? So then I started sending it, taking, you know, screenshots, sending
[Guest]: it to various people. And we were still not, I was still not satisfied with what the answer
[Guest]: that I was getting. Then one of my friends, she's a poet, Azra Naqvi, I went to her one
[Guest]: day and I said, Azra, can you please understand that? So she sat and she said reading. And
[Guest]: then suddenly she said, you know, this isn't worse. So when she got the verse is when we
[Guest]: were able to separate it. So we could then separate that. Okay, this title ends here.
[Guest]: This one starts here. So after that, it became easy. And then when I told that to my Mufti
[Guest]: Sahib, then he said, you know, and that he'd already told me, he said, one line is in Arabic
[Guest]: and the same thing he said in Persian. And it was obviously a very, very hyperbolic kind
[Guest]: of language that was used. So that was very difficult. And where is the part on the monuments
[Guest]: took me, say, two years to do it, because I wasn't doing it full time. I was writing
[Guest]: my book and doing this. But this part I did dedicated only to that it took me over a year,
[Guest]: those hundred pages. Wow. And that and then also I had to leave out a lot of portions
[Guest]: because the when he's talking about the poets and the ulemas, he gives their Persian and
[Guest]: Arabic Qasidas and whatever. So since I don't know Persian, I was translating it from a
[Guest]: historical point of view. So I kept only their biographies and whatever I thought was important
[Guest]: for a student of history to know. And I've left a note in my introduction that I hope
[Guest]: one day some Persian or Arabic scholar will translate the whole thing of this chapter
[Guest]: because I'm sure the Qasidas and the description that whoever wrote would be very, very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And in all your studies, when you're reading all these really old documents, are there
[Amit Varma]: enough of them for you to then get a sense of the evolution of the language through the
[Guest]: centuries? In this book itself, the first book to the second book. Persianized Urdu
[Amit Varma]: and the regular Urdu. Persianized to simple Urdu. Wow. So from one person. So, OK, so
[Amit Varma]: my next question is a slightly complex one in the sense that today, you know, there are
[Amit Varma]: so many debates about the idea of India, right? But the India itself is relatively recent.
[Amit Varma]: Now, through your history of studying all the many different delis that have come up,
[Amit Varma]: you have also come across, I don't know what's the phrase for it. I can't call it the many
[Amit Varma]: ideas of Delhi, but sort of the many ideas of us as seen from Delhi, you know, the many
[Amit Varma]: ideas of whoever lives in Delhi or what they are, what the society is like, you know. So
[Amit Varma]: is it possible to say that there are sort of different ideologies and philosophies of
[Amit Varma]: the state and so on evolving through these centuries? Or is it like very binary in the
[Amit Varma]: sense of, OK, we are now the kings, we will destroy everything else, we will do our own
[Amit Varma]: thing? Or is there something much more subtle and complex and assimilative happening there?
[Guest]: Something much more subtle and assimilative. We have, on the one hand, we do have the kings
[Guest]: who are destroying and who are rebuilding. But on the other hand, we have a Dargah of
[Guest]: Hazrat Zamuddin where Basant is being celebrated. As I said, we have a Mughal king who is offering
[Guest]: a Chadar at a temple in Mehrauli and saying that if I can't go to the temple, I will not
[Guest]: go to the Mandir. You have Holi, Diwali, Rakhi being celebrated inside the Red Fort and there
[Guest]: is a documented proof that Muhammad bin Tughlaq was celebrating Holi. Ibn Battuta, I think,
[Guest]: talks of it. So you have all this and you have, you know, like, it's so complex. It's,
[Guest]: you know, like when you talk of one period or you talk of one ruler, there are so many
[Guest]: facets to it. Like now one of my favorite stories again is Muhammad bin Tughlaq. He
[Guest]: was a tyrant. He is supposed to be an eccentric genius. He had so many of these master strokes
[Guest]: that over the change of capital, the currency, you know, etc. etc. And in between, a lot
[Guest]: of people died. So when his cousin Feroz Shah Tughlaq ascends the throne, what he does is
[Guest]: that he was very fond of his cousin, obviously, and he never thought he'd be the king. Now
[Guest]: he becomes the king. So he gets searches for all the descendants of the people that Muhammad
[Guest]: bin Tughlaq had killed. And that's a story that's documented. And I think Sir Syed and
[Guest]: Mashiruddin Ahmed both have documented. I've mentioned who have documented it in the book.
[Guest]: I keep getting so much of information overload that I forget who's documented what. So he
[Guest]: then gets these mafi namas from them, from the descendants, and he buries them next to
[Guest]: the grave of Muhammad bin Tughlaq. May God forgive him. Wow. I thought he'd out of remorse,
[Amit Varma]: he contacted them to make their lives better in some way, but no, he wanted the mafi namas
[Guest]: for his brother. So this is how things happened then. So he's getting that. Whether he didn't
[Guest]: make their life better or not, I don't know. He may have. But because he ruled for 50 years
[Guest]: and he was supposed to be a good king. But this is how so, you know, on one hand, you
[Guest]: have that. On the other hand, you have that Muhammad bin Tughlaq also built the Satpula,
[Guest]: which is an irrigation system so that the farmers could have, you know, water, easy
[Guest]: water. So all this is also happening. And he was a very devoted devotee of Hazrat Ramuddin
[Guest]: Ali. In fact, he is one of the few people who he held his beer in his funeral. So he
[Guest]: had that aspect to him also. He was very cruel also. So you have all this. So every ruler
[Guest]: has many aspects to it. And the people who are living also have obviously different.
[Guest]: And the other thing is that this is Sahil Udhiyanvi. When we talk of Taj Mahal and today
[Guest]: is Valentine's Day, so we talk of Taj Mahal, we talk of Mumtaz Mahal and Shah Jahan, of
[Guest]: their love for each other. And Sahil Udhiyanvi says,
[Guest]: The artisans must also have worked. Those whose, you know, their graves are unknown.
[Guest]: So there are so many levels, so many aspects, and we can just keep on talking about the
[Guest]: people who lived here. They are nameless. We don't even know where they are buried.
[Guest]: They are dead and gone. The people who actually built the cities, we don't know about them.
[Guest]: Now we do know the architects of Shah Jahanabad. They have mahalas named after them. Ustad
[Guest]: Hira, Ustad Lahori, there are mahalas or areas in Shah Jahanabad which are named after them.
[Guest]: But what about the people? We don't know them. What about the people who live there? We don't
[Guest]: know much about them. We know the areas. We know that there is one Paiwala. Now Paiwala
[Guest]: was because they sold bedsteads. Kinari Bazaar and Dareeba were the places where wedding
[Guest]: shopping was done. Who were the people who got married? Who were the people who had happy
[Guest]: marriages or whatever it is? These are things we have no idea about. So we, you know, history
[Guest]: is, as they say, written only from one point of view at a time.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that's what my next question was going to be about. But before we go there,
[Amit Varma]: let me point out to my listeners, we are recording this on Feb 14th, which shows our dedication
[Amit Varma]: to our work that Rana ji has come all the way from Greater Noida to Hauskas to talk
[Amit Varma]: about history with me. And here I am recording in a studio far from home. And like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, you know, in the 20th century and in the 19th century, even, it's very easy, relatively
[Amit Varma]: easy to get a sense of the lives that common people lived. But earlier centuries, as you
[Amit Varma]: said, a lot of the history is written from the point of view of the court and the rulers
[Amit Varma]: and whatever. And some of it, in fact, is actually court history. And you have to then
[Amit Varma]: dig deeper to find other reliable histories. But we don't really get a sense of how the
[Amit Varma]: common people lived. And the history of all of these Delhi's that you've written about
[Amit Varma]: also is not just a history of the tombs of these noblemen and these great monuments that
[Amit Varma]: they built. But how much harder is it to then understand the lives of the common people
[Amit Varma]: and how they lived and where they lived?
[Guest]: So these descriptions come only from those very short stories that I've given of, there
[Guest]: are a lot of these Urdu books, but written after the fall of the Mughal Empire. Like
[Guest]: there's this book called Dilli ki ajeeb shakhsiyat, Dilli ki chand shakhsiyat. Now they talk about
[Guest]: a kebab ji called Ghummi kebabi. And Ghummi used to be a cook in the Mughal kitchen. And
[Guest]: he comes onto the roads after 1857 and he opens up his stalls and how he is very particular
[Guest]: about that. Whoever comes has to be in line. He will only serve people as per the time
[Guest]: that they've come and how he serves and how he talks.
[Amit Varma]: So there was a time when Indians knew how to queue up.
[Guest]: And today when I, you know, there is a favorite kebab wala of mine, which I go to in Mattia
[Guest]: Mahal and that is the same area where Ghummi would have sat. And again that Babu bhai also
[Guest]: does not, you know, like people have to queue up there. You may be, you may, you know, like
[Guest]: you may be as sophisticated as somebody or you may be just an ordinary worker or a laborer.
[Guest]: He does not differentiate. He will give you only as per the time that you've come there
[Guest]: and given the order. So I love that about him. And the fact that he, you know, like
[Guest]: he's so very egalitarian about his approach of whom he's serving and how he's serving.
[Guest]: And if there's a big rush, he will not talk to you. He, there's no time for chit chat.
[Guest]: Like once I was doing, I was, you know, like scouting around for a food show and I wanted
[Guest]: to showcase him and I went to him and he said, see, I don't have time for all this. I said,
[Guest]: you know, I said, you'll be on TV, you'll be shown all over the world. He said, mujhe
[Guest]: farag nahi padta. Mere paas bohot kaam hai. Mere paas bhakt nahi hai. So there are these
[Guest]: kind of characters also, but who are there, who are part, who make a city. But they, like
[Guest]: I try to document as much, there's a machhli wala who sits next to him and he sells fried
[Guest]: fish. I have not eaten his fried fish actually, but I've spent a long time talking to him
[Guest]: because he likes to chat. So I asked him once, I said, he said, I'm a third generation or
[Guest]: a fourth generation sitting here and selling. So I said, when everybody, because that area,
[Guest]: a lot of people migrated to Pakistan, I said, why didn't you go? And he said, humare budhur
[Guest]: ko ne ka, ke Jamna kaise jaayegi humaise saath, Jama masjid kaise jaayega, Qutub Minar kaise
[Guest]: jaayega humaise saath, toh hum kaise chale jaaye.
[Guest]: Oh, that's beautiful. So you get a sense of...
[Guest]: So these are stories which I've documented. I find it so fascinating to talk to these
[Guest]: people that they are the ones who actually are the... ke yahan ki mitti ye hai, they
[Amit Varma]: are the ones who hold us all together.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the sort of disturbing things about the current times, very disturbing
[Amit Varma]: things, is this sort of caricaturish view of the Indian Muslim, which is being spread
[Amit Varma]: by the current political dispensation, mostly by people who've never had Muslim friends
[Amit Varma]: or interacted with Muslims in any way. But it's a very caricatured view where it is assumed
[Amit Varma]: that all Muslims are necessarily radicalized, and they are somehow conflated with Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: as if there is, you know, something that wrong with Pakistan to begin with, you know. And
[Amit Varma]: is this sort of something that is just of this century? I mean, through the centuries,
[Amit Varma]: has there been sort of this kind of caricaturish view of the Indian Muslim, this kind of...
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, when one looks at the sweep of history, it seems very clear that everything
[Amit Varma]: is very syncretic. And sure, you have all this violence, which is political violence,
[Amit Varma]: which is happening at the level of the ruler destroying things and building things or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But how has society been in all this time?
[Guest]: See, this thing started after 1857. The first war of Indian independence, as it's been called,
[Guest]: I prefer to call it the uprising, because all of India did not participate in it. So
[Guest]: when the uprising of 1857 took place, it was termed by the British as a Mohammedan conspiracy.
[Guest]: And it's after that, that they went after the Muslims, because for them, it was the
[Guest]: Muslims who rose against them. Although that is not a fact, it was across religion, across
[Guest]: religion, people who went against him. And if you had Hazrat Mahal, you also had Lakshmibai,
[Guest]: then you had Kumar Singh, if you had Azimullah Khan, you had Kumar Singh, you had in Delhi
[Guest]: itself, you had so many people and the saying Vallabhgarh ke jo Raja Nahar the, you had
[Guest]: a lot of people who were even punished and who were executed afterwards. So that's not
[Guest]: a fact. But the thing is that that is what they saw, because the head of what they call
[Guest]: the rebels or the Ghaddar was Bahadur Shah Zafar, they had crowned him, whom they exiled.
[Guest]: So they termed it a Mohammedan conspiracy. So after that, and they also went after the
[Guest]: ruling class and the Zambidars. And that is when the actual demonization starts. And there's
[Guest]: a building here, which I have mentioned in my book also, there's a building here on the
[Guest]: ridge near the university called the Mutiny Memorial. It was put up, I think, in 1864.
[Guest]: On that, they give a timeline of the siege of Delhi. And they write on the 14th of September
[Guest]: 1857, Kashmiri Gate is breached, then they talk of 17th September, the king flees the
[Guest]: fort and then 20th, they say they have captured the Red Fort. And then they say 21st September,
[Guest]: the city is emptied of the enemy. Now, when you read Dastan-e-Ghaddar, you know that the
[Guest]: enemy that is emptying and the enemy that's running away are the Muslim noble or the land
[Guest]: owners or the whoever it is we're running away from them. And then just below that,
[Guest]: you have a plaque written by the Indian government, I think, in 100 years of 1857 were being celebrated,
[Guest]: where they say that the term enemy refers to patriots. So it's there they started, that is how
[Guest]: it was perceived. And for so many years, they were not allowed, the Muslims were not allowed
[Guest]: to come back to Shahjahanabad. And Ghalib documents that in his Dastanbu when he's talking about that.
[Guest]: So does, of course, Zaheer Dahilvi. Zaheer Dahilvi talks about how he went to Alwar, then Jaipur and
[Guest]: all over the place. And then finally, he goes to Rampur. From Rampur, then he gets a Maafi Nama
[Guest]: and he's allowed to come back only, I think, as late as 1864, he comes back to Delhi because
[Guest]: at that time there was going to be a Delhi Darbar. And then they gave a general Maafi Nama to the Muslims
[Guest]: and said, OK, you can come back. But they do not come back into their old positions.
[Guest]: And then there is this book called Begmat Ke Aasu written by Khawaja Hassan Nizami, which talks of
[Guest]: the whatever befell the Mughal prince and princesses, where they are now begging on the streets.
[Guest]: And there's again a book which has taken the story is also written in Begmat Ke Aasu
[Guest]: by Ahmed Ali, the book called Twilight of Delhi, where he talks of Darbar ho raha hai and the king is
[Guest]: going out on an elephant. And there's this man on a wooden, a cripple on a wooden cart, who's
[Guest]: a physically challenged person on a wooden cart, who's begging. And it turns out that he's a Mughal prince.
[Guest]: So, you know, these are things which were very much happened after. And then 1811, now this
[Guest]: demonization of the Muslims started not just in 1857. It happens much before that. It happens when
[Guest]: James Mills writes the history of British India. When he writes that in 1811, he had never come to
[Guest]: India. He did not come to India even during or after writing it. He classifies it as Hindu,
[Guest]: Muslim and British period. Now, he talks of the Hindu period as the golden period. Muslim is now
[Guest]: the barbaric period and the British period are the saviors. And then you have this Eliot and Dawson,
[Guest]: where it gives in the preface itself. They say that they want to talk about how the
[Guest]: the people of India have been saved by the British. So, this is a very systematic thing that happened
[Guest]: then during the national movement and afterwards. Then this whole thing, there was a lot of attempts
[Guest]: to finish that. Gandhiji tried very hard. And as I always keep saying, I said, I grew up in Nehru's
[Guest]: India when we did not have this difference of a Hindu and a Muslim. I never ever felt I was a
[Guest]: Muslim. Of course, I'm a practicing Muslim. I do my prayers five times a day, whatever I do.
[Guest]: I did that at home. It was never something I wore on my sleeve. But past four or five years,
[Guest]: there's never a day when I'm not reminded that I am a Muslim. Before that, my only identity was
[Amit Varma]: that I'm an Indian. And you know, with the British, it was obviously the dual imperative of one divide
[Amit Varma]: and rule. So it's a strategic thing that you're doing that. And to also, you know, it was a simple
[Amit Varma]: narrative, which kind of explained a very complex country. So they went along with it that you have
[Amit Varma]: Hindu period, Muslim period and so on. Now, the thing is, looking back in history, you know, I'll
[Amit Varma]: just to declare my bias straight away, it is obviously tempting for me to look at history
[Amit Varma]: and look at our syncreticism and look at our society and say that, you know, Hindus and Muslims
[Amit Varma]: have always lived in peace side by side. But equally, you can cherry pick evidence and come
[Amit Varma]: to the conclusion that there have always been sort of there are a between the two, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and a lot of how an outsider a layman like me would look at this history is I would look at
[Amit Varma]: through the lens of my own bias, as I stated, for something like this, which is obviously such an
[Amit Varma]: emotive subject, and which obviously has so much resonance with our current lives in the world that
[Amit Varma]: we live in. How do you negotiate this sort of history? And do you feel that there is sort of
[Amit Varma]: a clear narrative and the divisions that are there today are perhaps sharper than, you know, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, we've had incredibly sharp divisions during the troubled times of partition and the
[Amit Varma]: years before and so on. But if you look through the centuries old history of Delhi, are these
[Guest]: relatively new? The divisions were between the rulers and the ruled. They were not religious
[Guest]: differences. It was, you know, the oppression was there, but it was of the ruler. It wasn't seen as,
[Guest]: you know, that, okay, he's a Muslim, he's oppressing me or he's a Hindu, he's replacing.
[Amit Varma]: And that was Nehru's point of view as well. In fact, that a lot of communal differences
[Guest]: aren't really religious differences. And if you see the history of communal rights,
[Guest]: there were only five communal rights during the Mughal rule that also after the 18th century,
[Guest]: out of which the first was in Ahmedabad. And after that, you've, after independence and here,
[Guest]: even during the time of Nehru, you've had many, during the Congress rule also, you've had so many
[Guest]: communal rights. And of course, now you have open division. I will, you know, like I normally am
[Guest]: normally I'm very guarded about what I say, because I try to always look on the optimistic side of it.
[Guest]: But there is no doubt that there is an all out attempt now to create a division.
[Guest]: That otherization is happening. And to create the other, you have to
[Guest]: make a caricature out of the other. You demonize and dehumanize.
[Guest]: And a person like me who keeps, you know, like who fits in well into every kind of this thing.
[Guest]: So I do not fit into the narrative of either the right wing Hindu or the right wing Muslim.
[Guest]: And I am trolled and I'm abused by everybody. So I'm called a kafir by the Muslims and I'm
[Guest]: called a budhparastana jihadi by the Hindus. So, you know, this otherization is that bad
[Guest]: that anybody who talks of syncretism is considered, you know, a person of non-grata in these days.
[Guest]: Because that is what is standing in the way. Both of them say, of course, the Muslim right
[Guest]: wing is nowadays very, I should say, is not very empowered because the way that I'm talking of,
[Guest]: say, a few years ago. Today, of course, they have been very restrained in their responses.
[Guest]: And it has been taken over as just now in Shaheen Bagh, where this,
[Guest]: although that news turned out to be false, but initially when there was this report that
[Guest]: the Deobandi, from some clerics from Deobandi saying that, you know, the Shaheen Bagh protest
[Guest]: should stop. And this lady said, we are fighting for the constitution, not for religion,
[Guest]: that we should listen to you. So the narrative has changed. People have taken over and they've
[Guest]: taken over from the religious leaders and they're trying to chart their own destiny.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying that, you know, this otherization was happening
[Guest]: for a very long time. Today, it's happening from the Hindu right wing. It's happening
[Guest]: very, very, it's very fast. Like, how should I say it?
[Guest]: You recognize them by their clothes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you recognize them by their clothes? How do you recognize me by my clothes?
[Amit Varma]: And even the demonization of biryani, you know, which is like my favorite food.
[Guest]: So I keep saying, I think the Mughal favorite food was khichdi. They did not eat biryani.
[Guest]: The word biryani was not even coined then. The Mughals did not eat biryani. Biryani comes much
[Guest]: later in the late 18th and 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: And these people would not be wearing the clothes they wear if the Mughals hadn't come here.
[Guest]: Where do you think Modiji's churidar kurta comes from?
[Guest]: So pajama itself is brought by them, pajama. But if you see Nuskhai Shah Jahani,
[Guest]: which has been translated by Mrs. Salma Hussain as, I think, the emperor's table.
[Guest]: Shah Jahan was very fond of cholai ka saag, baigan ka bhurta, aloo ka bhurta. He's eating
[Guest]: the thing, the word biryani then was called zere biryani. And he's eating paneer ka zere biryani.
[Guest]: So all these things are there, but they never ate the biryani and meat that week,
[Guest]: thing that they did. They were very fond of khichdi and they were vegetarian on many days
[Guest]: of the week. So Aurangzeb was totally vegetarian.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, as was Hitler. But, you know, paneer biryani, frankly, I must draw a line and here
[Amit Varma]: I will be judgmental about the past ki paneer biryani kaun khata hai. But, you know, and would
[Amit Varma]: you also say, and again, I don't want to be guilty myself of romanticizing what's happening. But would
[Amit Varma]: you also say that what Shaheen Bagh represents, for example, is a combination of the best of all
[Amit Varma]: the centuries of Delhi in terms of people coming together in spite of their diversity and their
[Amit Varma]: differences. And also a combination of that with this modern India, where we have this liberal
[Amit Varma]: constitution and we want to live by sort of these values and this idea of India. Or am I romanticizing
[Amit Varma]: it too much? Or do you see, you know, while all this othering which makes you despair is going on,
[Guest]: do you also see some hope? I think what has happened in Shaheen Bagh happened very spontaneously.
[Guest]: And it's just become such a beautiful movement of inclusiveness of, you know, and because it's
[Guest]: controlled by the women, I think it has that certain touch to it, where that harshness is
[Guest]: not there. And it's just beautiful the way they are doing it, the way they embrace everybody. And
[Guest]: I've gone there a couple of times, the way the inclusiveness of including everybody and how
[Guest]: everybody is coming and being, you know, like joining with them across religion. So it's nothing
[Guest]: to do with now. It is, of course, it is their identity, which is at stake. And when you go there,
[Guest]: there is no doubt that the maximum number of things that you see, the most of the people
[Guest]: that you see will be wearing scarves and hijabs. But it's, you know, you don't, that's not the
[Guest]: thing that comes to your mind. They are wearing hijabs or whatever, but you do not see them as
[Guest]: Muslims. You see them as women who are sitting there, very strong women who are sitting there
[Guest]: protesting against something which is a constitutional right. So I do see that even I
[Guest]: romanticize it. It is something which is just spread all over. And when I was, once I was
[Guest]: talking to them and I was telling them, I said, you know, that this is the continuation of Sultan
[Guest]: Razia. After all, Razia also stood up for her rights and stood up for her people. And she stood
[Guest]: up to the jahilgani who were trying to oust her. And her father did say that she is equal to 20 of
[Guest]: my sons. So in Delhi, and then you had Jehan Ara, you had Zebun Nisar, you had a long list of women
[Guest]: who have been strong. And if we take it, if we do take even Indraprastha as having been here at
[Amit Varma]: some point of time, then you have Draupadi. And that's also interesting. You know, when you look
[Amit Varma]: back at Indian mythology, for example, and you look at the stark contrast between Draupadi and
[Amit Varma]: Sita, and Sita almost seems to represent the ideal Indian woman as per, you know, the dominant
[Amit Varma]: political view today would have it where she's subservient to her husband, and she's all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And Draupadi is incredibly rebellious and badass and independent and whatever, which kind of shows
[Amit Varma]: you that it's, you know, Indian sanskar is not so simple to pin down. It's got all these different
[Guest]: strands, you know, even within Hinduism. Also, like I think the whole of India watched Ramayana
[Guest]: and Mahabharata very religiously. There was not a single episode I missed. And in Mahabharata,
[Guest]: I must have watched multiple times because I have to love the dialogue, especially of Sri Krishna.
[Guest]: So, but recently, I think it's three or four years now that when Amisha's book came out on Sita.
[Guest]: So, there the Sita is very different from this Sita. His Sita is a warrior. She is, in fact,
[Guest]: the defense minister of Mithila. And she's a warrior and she's the Vishnu. So, when I read
[Guest]: that, you know, it opened a whole new world of Sita to me. Yes, she does accompany her husband,
[Guest]: but she's the Vishnu and then she marries Ram and then Ram also becomes a Vishnu. But it is she who
[Guest]: is a very strong character. And it's a wonderful book. I really love that. They show Sita as
[Guest]: somebody, a very, very strong character, not as the submissive character that we were seeing,
[Guest]: that we saw in the TV series. So, there are supposed to be a lot of versions of Ramayana.
[Guest]: There are, I think, 300 versions or something like that. Many versions. So, every version is
[Guest]: written from a different and I had met Amish while he was writing it. And he said that he
[Amit Varma]: is consulting a version that has Sita as the main character in it. That's remarkable. And I've just
[Amit Varma]: realized that I've taken up almost two hours of your time. So, but before we go, tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about, you know, what are you working on now? You know, you've done these books on Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: you've translated these books. What keeps you going? What's your next project? How do you,
[Amit Varma]: what do you look forward to when you wake up in the morning?
[Guest]: I'm working on three projects at the moment. One is a book and two projects. I normally don't like
[Guest]: talking in advance. I'm a little superstitious, let's put it about my work. But the one project
[Guest]: that has already, it's finished and about to come is an app which I have done on for a group called
[Guest]: Rest Bird, which they were outsourced by ASI. It's on monuments. It's where you can read and
[Guest]: hear about it. There's a podcast and there are different descriptions. I've curated 12 monuments
[Guest]: for them on that. So, that is something that I'm very, I worked on the whole of last year. I
[Guest]: visited these 12 monuments and I did that. And there are two other projects I'm working on. One
[Guest]: is, two are books. And there's a third, yes. And the third, which is another thing that I'm working
[Guest]: on. Hopefully by May, there should be more clarity. Cannot wait. And before you go, I'd like
[Amit Varma]: you to ask, like my listeners always keep saying that they discover so many books through the
[Amit Varma]: podcast and they love it when my guests recommend books that they absolutely should read. So before,
[Amit Varma]: without tying you down to a subject like Delhi or whatever, just recommend three books that you
[Amit Varma]: think everybody should read. And you can't include your own books because I am recommending those.
[Guest]: I think they're absolutely amazing. So, one book is Richard Eaton, India and the Persian Age.
[Guest]: That definitely everybody should read. And the second book is Manu Pillay's Rebel Sultans.
[Guest]: Rebel Sultans, yeah. And third is Ira Mukherjee's, I'll give you four. And third is Ira Mukherjee's
[Guest]: Daughters of the Sun. And fourth is Mani Mukder's Allahu Akbar.
[Amit Varma]: That's fantastic because I've already done episodes with Manu and Ira and I am doing an
[Amit Varma]: episode next week with Mani Mukder. So I feel like I've covered much of the material. I shall
[Amit Varma]: definitely pick up that Richard Eaton book. Rana, thank you so much for being so generous with your
[Amit Varma]: time and more power to all the work that you do in future.
[Guest]: I hope it turned out also the way you wanted it to.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's great. And my listeners will tell you that on Twitter that this was such a fun episode.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: I am Rana. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening. And hey, don't stay at home after listening to this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Go out, look at the city around you.
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai